So now that we've seen how to use the
debugger to step through our code line by line,
let's explore if statements a bit more.
So I'm going to continue with the
project we set up for this section of
the course - Program Flow. I'm going to
create a new python file and we're going to call that guessing game.
Alright. Now I'm going to start this up very simply
but we'll improve it as we go along.
Firstly, I'm going to start by binding
a variable to the answer. Now the answer
will always be five at the moment
and that's a bit boring but we'll improve
the program later. So answer = 5
So next I want to print a prompt to let
the user know what they're entering,
and then we'll use the input function to get their input. So on line 3 I'm gonna
type print parenthesis double quotes,
Please guess a number between one and ten.
We'll put a colon and a space there, then we've got that closing double quote and right parenthesis.
Then we're going to accept
the input by typing guess equals int
left parentheses input, left and right
parentheses and then a closing right parenthesis.
Now I haven't provided a prompt
this time. We're printing a message on
line three which tells the player what
the program's expecting them to do.
Line four uses the input function without a prompt, but we still need the opening and
closing parentheses after it, as you saw
me type. As before, we're using the int
function to convert their input to an
integer. All input is stored as a string,
but here we want to deal with numbers. So on line 4, we're actually binding the
name guess to the integer value that
we've converted to an integer.
So make sure you only entered valid numbers when
we run the program. We'll be looking at
how to cope with invalid input later in
the course.
Alright though, now it's time to see if
the players guess was correct. Now here,
when we run the program, there's three
possible outcomes. The guess could be too
low, it could be too high or they could
have guessed it correctly. What we want
to do first is test for a too low guess.
We'll do that first and we'll do that on
line 6 by typing if guess is less than
answer : then in parentheses, sorry print, then
parenthesis on line 7, double quotes,
Please guess higher. Then we've got our
closing double quote and right parenthesis. So
basically, if their guess is less than the
answer, we print a message asking them to
guess higher. Now there's a bit more we
need to do here but we'll come back to
that. Before we do though, let's add a
test for the guess being too high. Now
we can do that using elif. So I'm here on
line 8, I'm going to type elif guess.
This time I'm going to type greater than
answer :
Then we're going to print on line 9,
parenthesis double quote, Please guess
lower. Then we've got our closing double
quote and right parenthesis. Now you might
think that we can just use if there, and
you often can, but I'm going to discuss
why that's sometimes not a good idea, shortly.
Alright, so if the condition on
line 6 is false, the condition on line
8 is tested, and if that evaluates to
true, in other words, if their guess is
greater than the answer, then we print
the message Please guess lower. So that's
two of the three possible outcomes dealt
with. We're checking for the guess being
less than the answer, and for it being
greater than the answer, so far. If both
those conditions are false, then the
guess must be equal to the answer.
In other words, they've guessed correctly. So
therefore, we can handle everything else
here using else. So we're going to type
else: on line 10, and print a message,
print parenthesis double quote, You got it
first time, then we've got a closing
double quote and right parenthesis. So
basically, the message on line 11 is only
going to be printed if both the
conditions on line 6 and line 8
evaluate to false. Because else picks up
everything else, it must come after the
if and elif blocks. elif must follow an if,
and all elif blocks have to appear
before the else block, if there is one.
Right, so let's run the program a few
times to check that it's working. I'm
gonna run it now. Now first I'm gonna
enter my guess as 4. Remember to click
into the run pane, as I just did, before
typing your guess. We get the message "Please
guess higher", which is correct because
obviously 4 is less than 5. I'm gonna
run it again,
and this time I'm gonna type a higher value, 8.
You can see we've got the output "Please
guess lower", which is also correct. 8, of
course, is more or higher than 5.
The third test is when the guess is correct,
so I'm going to run that again,
and this time I'm going to type in the value 5,
and we've got the message "You got it
first time" on screen. So run the program
a few times with different guesses to
make sure it works, and in the next video
what we'll do is, we'll run the program
in the debugger to check what it's doing.
See you in the next video.